.TH CLASSIFY 1 "2022-03-13" "Version 1.0" "Language Toolkit"
.SH NAME
classify \- determine subregular class membership
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B classify
.RB [ -a | -A | -j | -p ]
.RB [ -e | -u ]
.RB [ -n | -N ]
.RB [ -hqv?\& ]
.RB [ -s
.IR symbols ]
.I class ...\&
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B classify
utility reads a finite-state automaton and determines
whether it belongs to a provided set of complexity classes.
The automaton is read from the standard input,
and its format is determined by command-line options.
For the AT&T tabular format, an optional symbol table may be provided
with the
.RB -s
option.
.PP
The return value indicates whether any
.RB ( -e ", default)"
or all
.RB ( -u )
of the specified classes contain the pattern.
.PP
Specifying more than one of any set of mutually-exclusive options
shall not be considered an error.
The last option specified shall determine the behavior of the utility.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS FORMATS
.TP
.B -a
AT&T tabular format, input projection.
This is the default.
.TP
.B -A
AT&T tabular format, output projection.
.TP
.B -j
Jeff format.
.TP
.B -p
PLEB format
.SS REDUCTION
.TP
.B -e
Exit successfully iff any specified class contains the pattern.
This is the default.
.TP
.B -u
Exit successfully iff all specified classes contain the pattern.
.SS NORMALIZATION
.TP
.B -n
Normalize the pattern before processing.
This is the default.
.TP
.B -N
Do not normalize the pattern before processing.
This is useful when dealing with an already-minimal
finite-state transducer rather than an acceptor.
.SS OTHER OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -h ", " -?\&
Show a brief help message and exit.
.TP
.B -q
Do not a output textual description of the membership queries.
.TP
.B -v
Instead of doing any processing, print the version number and exit.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
The pattern was contained as desired.
.TP
.B ">0"
An error occurred, or the pattern was not contained as desired.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR fsm (5),
.BR pleb (5)
