.TH DOTIFY 1 "2018-05-24" "Version 1.2" "Language Toolkit"
.SH NAME
dotify \- convert automata to GraphViz format directed graphs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dotify
.RB [ -c | -t | -w ]
.RB [ -hv?\& ]
.RB [ -o
.IR outfile ]
.RI [ infile ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
If the
.I infile
operand is missing or equal to
.RB \*(lq \- \*(rq,
then data is read from the standard input.
In all other cases, the
.I infile
operand is the name of a file from which to read.
If the contents represent a valid automaton,
a directed graph in the GraphViz format is printed to the standard output.
.P
Specifying more than one of the mutually-exclusive options
.BR -c ,
.BR -t ,
and
.B -w
shall not be considered an error.
The last option specified shall determine the behavior of the utility.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -c
Use compact symbols,
where, for example, a light syllable with primary stress is represented by
.BR 0/2 .
.TP
.BR -h ", " -?\&
Show a brief help message and exit.
.TP
.BI "-o " outfile
Write output to
.I outfile
instead of the standard output.
.TP
.B -t
Use transliterated symbols,
where, for example, a light syllable with primary stress is represented by
.BR L\(aq .
.TP
.B -v
Instead of doing any processing, print the version number and exit.
.TP
.B -w
Use wide symbols,
where, for example, a light syllable with primary stress is represented by
.BR w0.s2 .
This is the default.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
Successful program execution
.TP
.B ">0"
An error occurred.
.SH EXAMPLES
.BI "dotify " automaton.fsa " | dot -Tpng > " image.png
.RS
Create a PNG image from
.I automaton.fsa
and write the result to
.IR image.png .
.RE
.B dotify -co
.I out.dot automaton.fsa
.RS
Using compact symbols,
write a GraphViz representation of
.I automaton.fsa
to
.IR out.dot .
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR dot (1),
.BR graphviz (7)
